Yes.
Good afternoon.
Hello, how are you? Hello. Uh, Ms.
Okay, So you are Broda. I'm Bro Smith.
Bro Smith, welcome.
And you are colleague tha submitting our
welcome to join you at the table. Uh,
So my cheerleading crew, It's up to you.
Alright, look. Well, thank you.
And, uh, so we're a little bit late.
We've sort of got a, we're all determined on
what happens in the house here,
so thank you for your patience.
Um, you're obviously here nice and early, so, um,
now you can take your petition as being read.
Um, we have, we have 10 minutes. Fantastic.
Um, and you can use it however you like. Okay.
Um, it'll be good to leave some time
at the end for questions. Sure. So,
Fantastic. Thank
you very much. Um, firstly, I'd just like
to say thank you to far for reconsidering
what they've done with their, with patches. Oh,
Sorry. Just excuse me. Look, we, should
I introduce ourselves?
I'm Greg Ocon, the chair Paul MP for newly
Hi, Hamish Campbell, the MP for Ireland.
Hi, KDA Carter List MP based in Christchurch.
Fantastic. So first submitted for the year.
So getting into the, getting, getting back into process.
That's okay. And you'll start your 10 minutes again.
Okay, brilliant. Um, so good afternoon.
My name's Broda Smith. Um,
and so thank you for letting me come and present to you.
Um, firstly, I just wanted to, um, just recognize
that perimenopause
and menopause, um, is a life stage,
that it's not only just about women,
it's also affects transgender non-binary
and intersection communities as well.
So, um, I started this, uh, petition in 2022
as part of the menopause awareness month.
There were three things on those petitions,
um, that I wanted to talk about.
So training for gps, menopause awareness
and support in the workplace,
and also menopause in the school curriculum.
I found one other, which is about, um,
putting menopause into the Human's Rights Act in section 21,
or being a reason for not being able to discriminate people
'cause of menopause or menstruation,
which at the moment it's completely silent.
Um, my reason for starting the survey is a personal journey.
I have, um, been severely impacted
by perimenopause in my life.
Um, physical symptoms of hot flushes, night sweats,
digestive problems were nothing compared
to the mental effects that it had on me.
Um, my anxiety was so bad
that I would actually throw up before I went to work.
Um, I, uh, suffered, um,
a nanosecond rage process where I could be very, very calm
and then snap.
I'm, I'm talking to you in a very unprofessional manner.
Um, and it got to the stage where I actually had
to leave my role as a chief financial
officer for a regional council.
So, um, along with that, I almost lost my marriage.
So it's been a big journey for me.
Um, and it didn't need to be like that.
You know, there is, um, support available.
Um, and I was lucky enough
that once I'd actually fallen off the cliff
and was halfway up to sea, I got picked up by, um,
a local woman's health gp, Dr. Samantha Newman, um,
a a specialist in sleep
and also a, um, counselor who looked after me for six months
and got me to the stage where I could actually cope again.
Um, and so this is where my menopause journey,
my second menopause journey started, which is about advocacy
for, for menopause and for being different
for both in the workplace, um, and, and across the board.
So, uh, menopause
and curriculum in schools, um, for me that's a no brainer.
There is, we teach men, um, sex health.
Um, why we don't teach the end of that reproductive cycle,
um, is something
that I consider would be a standard process.
Most people who are in their teenage years probably got a
menopause menopausal mum at home.
Mm-hmm. Or someone in the family.
So they can, it opens up that ability for, um, the mum
or the, you know, the person who might be going
through menopause to talk to their child and understand it.
So that's a, um, you know, really big aspect of, uh,
shortening that gap.
Um, menopause awareness in the workplace, it's another,
it's one that I've got a lot of, um,
'cause I had to leave my work because of it.
Um, the, the ability to support women
who are, um, going through that stage of life is, um,
incredibly, incredibly important.
Um, in an article in the Harvard Review is recognized
that most women usually start menopause between the age
of 45 and 55.
That's when they're coming into their own in their career.
And in, in that space,
quite often they're not supported in the workplace.
Um, and in the recent, uh, menopause survey
that was done by Dr.
Linda dear, 14%
of women felt they weren't supported in the workplace
with only 3%, sorry, 14% considered.
They were, were supported
with only 3% having workplace policies.
Um, it also has a really big effect on, um,
on wom, like I said, in women in their career.
And in 16, um, 67% of employers said that women between 45
and 55 had a very important
or critical con contribution to the workplace.
And that came from a global study in June, um,
23 from, from a global woman.
Um, and it also has a really big impact on women later on in
life with, um, with both the average age
of when they actually retire being 7.4 years
earlier than men.
And in a recent study in Australia, they retired
with $577,000 less in their savings 'cause of that.
So it has a really big financial impact
on women's later life.
Um, and the Ministry of Women's Submission that came through
as part of, uh, submission
to my petition talked about the women's health strategy
and, um, how women have,
have had a significant impact on that as well.
Um, informed by this, uh,
the economic research,
which was published called Silent Transition,
understanding the impact
of menopause in New Zealand workplaces that was informed
by evidence from overseas.
Three quarters of a woman
who experienced menopause symptoms reported
that their symptoms affected their work equivalent to 64%
of all women in the sample.
But only 11% had discussed menopause with their managers.
And that survey found that 28% of women
who experienced menopause said they have had to quit,
change their jobs or cut down their hours.
Um, there is a light at the end of the tunnel.
There are some people in New Zealand
that are doing some really good work.
Uh, the University of Canterbury, um,
put together an education program for the woman in the,
in the university called, um, ra, um,
Tonga Menopause at Work.
And it's aimed to help support managers support
the women in the workforce.
Um, and it's a guide that they've put out
that has then also been taken up by the, uh,
university of Otago.
And there are companies like a IG, um, a I A
who are now putting menopause workplace, um,
policies into work to be able
to help structure things like flexible working time
and, um, those sorts of items is for people to be able to
change the way that they work.
And then the last one, which is metaphors, training
for GPS and medical students.
Now, this is a hard one only on, um, radio New Zealand.
Yesterday I heard that, uh, gps, um,
had shown that 36%
of GP practices across New Zealand had closed their books.
They weren't taking on any more patients.
So, you know, GPS are stretched.
Um, however, women going through menopause,
their GP is their first point of contact.
Other ones who are via, you know, the people that they go
to get the most support from.
And the menopause survey that was done by lot of Dr.
Linda dear, 74% of women sought help from their gps.
However, only 40% placed their gp.
And, um, so however, 40% of the women placed
GPS in their least helpful health practitioners.
So that's 40% of women who go to see,
see their gp, don't feel supported.
So whose survey was that? Sorry, Dr.
Linda DI's survey that was done in, um,
2023 had 4,280 participants.
I've got some information for you here.
This is all written up in that.
So with all of the, um, references,
um, and I'm also, uh, in my capacity of, um,
being an advocate, I've, um, one of the admins
for the Menopause Support Group New Zealand on Facebook,
of which has about 14, well, there's 14,800 members.
And it's probably the biggest thing that gets talked about
is, I, I didn't have much time with my gp.
I dunno what I'm doing. How do I take these drugs?
How do I take my patches? What do I do with them?
Because a 15 minute GP visit is too short.
And even if you've done, even if you've booked a double
visit, which you know, you get 30 minutes, um,
I unfortunately was one of those people that my doctor said
to me, I can't help you anymore.
I don't know enough. You're going to go
and have to see a specialist.
And I was lucky I got to see my local woman's, um,
health GP specialist that costs me $230 at the moment.
That's up to $540 a one hour session.
Now, I was lucky I could pay for that, but
because it's a GP not a specialist,
my insurance wouldn't pay for it.
So a lot of women aren't supported in that space.
Um, and there is training available for GPS in New Zealand.
I know the good fellow unit in Auckland have done quite a
bit of work along that space.
Dr. Smith and Newman, who was my savior, um,
has written some information for them as well.
Um, so really what we need is, you know, better support
for gps to make the training mandatory for them as part
of their, as part of their training,
but also for CPD hours to be included as for, um,
for menopausal women's support for them to understand it.
Um, and also something that the two of the people
behind me are working on is, um, the ability
to have a campaign around posters in doctors' offices
where women can get really good, really current information,
handouts for current information.
Um, that, 'cause quite often
what we end up doing in the support group
is giving them the research and the advocacy and the support
and the information to take to their doctors to say, yes,
I should be on HRT 31 is not too young.
We know of women who, you know, early menopause is a thing.
Surgical menopause is a thing.
So that's my presentation.
I whipped through that really quickly.
There's way more information in here,
but I wanted to allow you some time
to ask me anything you would like.
I will talk about everything.
Well, we, we, we've got time
for a couple of questions anyway. Any,
Yeah, I'd love to, if That's okay.
Um, thank you.
Just for firstly being so organized
and presenting, um, so eloquently for, you know,
after population, um, who will hopefully live
to experience menopause.
Um, I've, I've noticed myself, you know, maybe it's
'cause I'm in my forties, um, that, uh, I'm getting a lot
of things popping up on Facebook like
menopause, menopause, menopause.
So it was very, um, personally interesting for me as well
and for you to share your personal story
so generously with us.
Just wanted to, to talk all that.
Um, so in terms of like, you've,
you've really clearly stated those three main like focuses.
So like what is the dream for you?
Like what would that vision look like if this petition
and those three asks were to be, um,
you know, fulfilled?
What would it look like for women in
Um, I think the biggest thing for me is that support
for women and an understanding for women going through, um,
perimenopause and menopause, for them to be able
to feel like they can talk about it, they can get answers.
Um, and that even the people
around them understand what's happening.
So you, you know, that the men in their lives understand
what happening, their colleague, work colleagues understand
that, you know, if I need to turn the aircon on,
I should be responsible for running the heat in the room
because I can't take any more clothes off.
Um, you can put more clothes on.
You know, those are the things that it's, it's around,
it's not a taboo,
but that, that support is there both, like I said,
from their gps, from their workplaces, that it is a
common practice for menopause to be able to be talked about
and to be understood and for there to be support for them.
Yeah. So that public awareness,
which you were talking about in GPS offices
and um, actually probably with teenagers as well,
I'm thinking, oh my gosh, my teenagers
and then me in a household when you were talking about
this, it's like, yeah.
Um, it's a melting pot. Yeah.
But actually having that understanding
and support is actually key to them going on
and um, I guess advocating for ourselves as well.
Yeah. And I'm lucky enough that my mum is still alive,
so I could talk to my mum about
how she went through menopause.
Some people don't get that opportunity
and there's a little bit of a correlation between
how your mother went through menopause
and how you will mm-hmm.
Um, so you know, if your mum had a really hard time,
then it's possible that you will too.
Mm-hmm. So those conversations, to be able
to have those while are still here is really important.
Um, and, you know, if you can ask aunties
or some of those things as well,
but it's not like having a good chat with your mum.
So Yeah.
T good time. Thank you very much
For your submission. It is one
of my frustrations is many health aspects
that we don't talk about that aren't considered to do.
Uh, which I think is to our detriment.
Uh, I what, what training do GPS currently have?
Are you aware of any, any training
that gps currently have, uh, in this space?
Because it is, it is a very important, uh, aspect
of, of life really.
Yeah. Um, so are you aware of
what training they currently have?
So, I know, I definitely know
'cause Samantha Newman was the person
who wrote the Good Faller unit, um, via training,
which is a two or three hour, um, training session,
but it's all voluntary so they can sign up for it.
Um, but they don't have to.
Um, so those people who are really interested in it will,
um, the discussion, the, the response from the Ministry
of Health to my submission around training for, um, doctors.
I don't know that there's a lot.
Um, speaking with my GP at the time,
she said it was an hour, probably an hour
or two hours in the old time
of her training when she went through GP school.
And I mean the middle, you know, she's an an older doctor.
What that's like now I'm unsure.
But, um, that's not part of Ministry
of Health's requirements that comes through from
what they teach them, you know, and, um, to be a doctor
and what the requirements are.
But from all the evidence
that I see both in the Menopause support group
and talking to women, it's not enough.
There's not enough support in that space when you go
to your GP for them to be able to understand exactly
what exactly what's going on and how to support you.
And there's so much miscommunication around, um, HRT,
the effect on breast cancer, the effect on cancer.
Full stop. You're too young, you know, you're only 30,
you're only 35.
You shouldn't be going through menopause.
No that, but that, that is still not a possibility.
There's no blood tests.
The blood tests don't, it's all about symptoms.
So that training and understanding of it being,
it's a really big holistic process.
The other training that is, is it can look like anything
now menopause is, I'm feeling tired.
I'm, you know, is that your thyroid?
There's so much So you actually need to do a holistic look
of how that woman's coping
and what, what, what are her other symptoms?
Does she have heart palpitations? That's a symptom.
So there's, you know,
there's at least 48 known symptoms at the moment.
It's getting bigger every day.
So yeah, physical
and the mental ones, which are the ones
that can be the hardest to pinpoint?
'cause they quite often get that's anxiety.
Well just take some antidepressants.
Should be on HRT, first line of defense.
Oh look. Well thank you.
We, we've got some other submitters waiting now mm-hmm.
Which said we could, obviously we're learning nothing
about this petitions committee.
We, um, we learn a lot here.
I can imagine. We learn,
We learn a little about a lot.
Yeah.
I could be here for an hour if
you let me, but that's okay.
We, we, we have had submission from the ministry, um,
and from Ministry of Women's Affairs too.
Mm-hmm. So we'll consider all that and,
and we report back to Parliament now, obviously love to
Be able to talk to the Health Select committee. Alright.
Thank you very much. Thank You. And who do
I leave? Thank you for making the,
uh, you, you're Wellington Bay, Steve. I'm actually from
Hawkes Bay. Oh,
right. So you've made the trip down. So Yes. Great.
Well thank you very much for that. Appreciate
Thank you. I'll
Leave those. It's always nice to have people
in person.
Yeah, I, yeah. Much. Oh yes. If I'm really quick. Yes.
Is it okay if I take Fond?
Oh yeah, sure. I committee with that.
And you look so lovely. That's got waste.
Oh yeah. We can hold it. Would you like to? Oh no she isn't.
Shall we all hold? She's the star.
Come and stand here.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Thank you. We've got printed out
So someone understands politicians and photos.
You know, you'll go a long way with it.
I'm a local government so I know Exactly.
We never turned down photographs.
Thank you very much. Thank you. Thank you.
Bye. Right,
we're going our next item seven,
But Sharon's in Zoom.
I think the last by Zoom it
Was So they're all, we're all got Zoom.
These are all Zoom. Yeah.
Was there no One the submitter about person?
That was the last one. Yeah,
It is this one. Oh, this
one as well. Yeah. Hello.
Good. Kira. Sharon,
Kira Greek. Thank
You. I'm Greg O'Connor,
the chair of the committee.
I just briefly and we'll have our other submitters
will be presumably online.
So we'll just introduce ourselves while you're here. Um, KA
Kura, I'm KA QA
and I am a Green party list MP based in Christchurch.
Hi Sharon, I'm Hamish Campbell.
I'm the MP for Island down in Christchurch.
Hi Sharon. I'm Paolo Garcia.
I'm the MP for National in New Lynn.
Hello. And I'm a Wellington mp, so there you go.
You've got a good cover.
Good spreads. Alright Sharon, we've got 10 minutes now.
Um, we've read your submission, um,
but um, right to hear from you
and how, if we Good,
if you could lead some time for questions at the end.
Sure, sure. Okay.
Well firstly, thank you very much
for giving me the opportunity to speak today.
I really do appreciate it.
Um, really, I'm not sure ourselves as, uh,
parliament is the best place for this, uh, discussion.
Um, but we've had an issue over the last three
or four years, um, that we've turned
to Auckland Council for help.
Um, they've been very unhelpful.
We've felt very disillusioned by the council, um,
to help remedy the D issue.
We've contacted them many, many times, um,
and invited the council to meet with us personally, um,
either in our factory, on our premises, just anywhere
to meet with us and speak face to face.
This has never happened over about three and a half years.
Um, sorry, I'm just reading a couple of notes. Mm.
Uh, we believe this dust issue is a real hazard
to our health and not only us to our staff as well.
We really have got no idea
what we are breathing in on a daily basis.
Um, I have no personal issue with the director of Kiwi race.
Um, the issue I have is that the,
his ongoing business is affecting our business.
Um, we've, uh, sorry, I'm just looking at some notes here.
Notes and also our neighbors, um,
we didn't know where to turn to
after being unsuccessful of the council.
So I contacted our local mp.
Um, our local MP was good enough to make some time
to come out and see us and visit us on our premises.
And he was quite horrified by what he saw.
Um, it was him that encouraged us to make a petition
to the committee to have it heard, have our,
have our ideas heard
and have somebody else here while we are so upset.
And just hopefully somebody aiming to help us.
Um, which we haven't got from the council.
So I'm not speaking just on behalf
of myself and our business.
We've got various different, uh, factories down our street
that I'm speaking on behalf of.
But I'm not happy with the dust issue in Cookie Street.
Uh, just a little bit of background about our business.
Uh, my father-in-law started our company, um, back in 1968,
but we have been here on street for 40 years.
Uh, over that 40 years we've never had a problem with dust.
Not at all. Uh, in fact we operated our business
with our roller door wide open, um,
and had no dust entering our premises.
Um, since around 20, mid 2021, uh,
after Kiwi waste had, um, come onto their premises.
We've had issues with dust.
Uh, we can't control it, it's so fine.
It's almost like a powder is very hard to see.
It builds up on our cars in our factory, in our office,
in our lunch room.
Um, as I say, I dunno what's in this dust, A lot
of material, uh, building materials,
waste material goes into the waste pot.
Um, who knows what's in that.
Um, we've since had to renew our roof to block any areas
that dust may come through.
And we've also installed a rapid roller door, uh,
to keep the dust out of our factory.
Um, it's quite expensive, especially
after, um, the Covid era when we lucky enough
we managed to survive.
But that's just a brief, um, you know,
a brief, I don't know what you call it.
This is what's happening here.
Um, I know you've read my submission and my
and my petition.
Um, I'm just happy to ask any questions
that any of you may have.
And that's all I say.
Very succinct. Thank you. That's great.
Now, any, uh, questions?
Um, so the, the coun one of the things
that obviously the coun council, um,
and you've, are you aware of the council have sent
or have any monitoring
or have, have instigated anything themselves?
Not that I'm aware of.
Uh, we were told if we wanted any sort of dust monitoring
that we had to implement that ourselves and at our expense.
And is there any residential being affected
by this or is it
All Uh, not that I know of.
It's pretty industrial.
Right. Um,
The other thing was, um, when they kiwi waste got their
resource consent, they were
supposedly have contacted neighboring properties.
Nobody's contacted us.
And neighbors I've spoken
to have not been contacted either, so
And so just remind me.
I know. When, when, when did they get their
resource Kiwi waste? Um,
I'm getting at 21. I think it was 21.
Yeah, I just, I did, I sort
read it before I was gonna remind. Yeah.
I can't remember off the top of my head. But early 21.
And the problem's been ongoing since then?
Yes, it has. It's worse during the summer.
Uh, in the winter months when it rains, uh,
the rain deepens down the dust.
So what happens is a digger sits on top of the waste pile,
which is a two stories high now.
It used to be four stories. It's now down to two stories.
And with, when this digger digs into the pile
and picks up scoops of waste,
that's when the dust flies off.
The wind catches it, and it blows down the street.
Uh, at the moment, um, they've got a water cannon operating,
this is operating at the front of the pile
and this reduces the dust from the trucks
that are coming and going.
But there's no, there's a,
I think there might be a tiny sprinkler at the back
of the pile, but I mean, from my point of view,
the solution is simple.
This waste pile needs to be saturated with water
and then it will dribble through the pile.
When the sticker then picks up the, the
whatever it is in the pile and moves it, then the dust will,
there will be no dust in winter.
We, we, we don't have a problem whatsoever.
And is do you have a sort
of business association in the street, in the area or?
Not that I know of. I'm not sure there could well be.
Yeah, no collective body.
'cause they're saying that's the, it just where the
other businesses have obviously you, you've become the
unofficial spokesperson.
Yes, yes. I mean, we just dunno what we are breathing in.
That's who knows. Building waste.
Alright, well look, okay, look, there's,
there's no other questions.
Um, that Thank you very much.
We've, as you'll be aware, we've now got, um,
we're hearing from, um, from a IL protective
and kiwi waste themselves.
So you're welcome to remain on.
Okay. Thank you for your time. Thank
You. Alright, thanks a lot.
Goodbye. Right.
We've now got a IL tick of coatings.
Corey Glue.
Hello, how are you? I haven't quite got you yet.
Are you there? If you can
ask him to turn his camera on.
Is your camera on at moment?
Uh, my camera isn't working. Sorry.
Oh, okay. So we'll do this. Oh no, that's right.
So we'll do this as a, um, as a verbal.
So, alright, so you've got, uh, three, uh, four members
of the committee here, um,
from cross party and around the country.
Um, so we'll uh, hear from you now. Got 10 minutes.
So, um, looking forward to hearing from you
and hopefully leave time questions at the end.
Not a problem. Uh, thanks, thanks a lot for, um, hearing,
hearing from us about this.
Uh, um, uh, my name's Corey Luke.
I'm the, um, managing, uh, director
of a IL protective coatings.
Um, I've owned a IL for about seven years, um,
but I have managed it and run it for over 25.
Um, before that it was owned by my father.
Um, we've been in this location for 30 plus years.
Um, we're probably the most affected, um, by kiwi waste.
Um, as one of our boundaries is directly on, on the boundary
and the other is opposite there.
The driveway, uh, where most
of the rubbish comes out of in the pile.
Um, we've had power lines ripped down
by their trucks coming through, shutting us down, um, digger
through the side of our factory, smashing a hole
that you could climb through.
Um, if someone had have been there, well, if it was
during working hours, could have killed someone.
Um, but our biggest problem is the, the dust
and the rubbish, um,
that accumulates in our factory on our, on our property.
Um, we could have rubbish piling up a foot high in piles,
uh, two feet high in piles sometimes.
Um, the dust, uh, is just, if you walk
outside, um, you get it in your eyes.
Um, in our factory, you feel it in your teeth.
Um, you, if you blow your nose at the end of the day, it's,
it's dirt coming out of your nose.
Um, we, we do health products, um,
respirator products.
Um, we have to reclean all those parts
because of the amount of dust and
and debris that comes in through our factory.
Uh, it's, it's, it's hard.
It makes business a lot harder.
Um, I, I don't know the guys from Kiwi waste.
Um, we're all in a business trying to make money.
Um, but for me, the problem that I see
other than all the dust is just, uh, Auckland City Council.
Uh, just the inaction I've had.
Um, we've tried to get meetings.
Uh, we even have ideas that they could do to try
and fix these things, but Auckland City
Council just will not meet.
We've tried to get meetings with everyone affected,
including kiwi waste, including the council.
Um, it's, it's just been never ending
and just a constant brush off.
Um, we have video evidence,
everything we could possibly show anyone.
Uh, since 2021, um, I think it says
that there's only been one complaint, um,
against kiwi waste.
Um, I've made since 2021, I've made 27 complaints
to Auckland City Council.
That's what I have record for.
Um, and part of that time we just gave up.
Um, it's, you know, 27 times
last week when we made a complaint about the dust.
The Auckland City Council sent a personnel.
Um, and this is what gets me, this is what really annoys me.
If I make a complaint about my location,
they send a person out
and he sits 150 meters down the road
in his car on the side of the road
and then tells us there's no dust problem.
If I could move my factory 150 meters down the road,
I wouldn't be calling the
council 'cause I wouldn't have a problem.
All we need is we've asked them constantly that if we call
to come and see us, we can show you the problem.
But they just seem to skirt any problem
that we've ever had had.
Um, definitely all we get is they could not find any fault.
Um, we know there's a fault
because we are dealing with it when it happens.
Um, the eastly wind for us is the problem.
It blows it straight off the pile, straight across,
whether they're open or closed.
I can have an east heavy eastly wind
and there will be a pile of rubbish on my driveway.
My factory floor will be coated in dust,
whether we've got the door open or not.
Um, and we shouldn't have to stay in our factory, um,
with our doors up, uh, just so that we can work.
Um, it, it's just, it's, it's becoming annoying
and just costly.
Um, if we could get some meetings with the council,
we wouldn't be in the situation of contacting you guys,
but they have just constantly brushed us off.
Uh, it's just something that has to be done.
We dunno what we're breathing in.
Um, environmentally, we dunno the amount of rubbish.
Like I said, if I can have rubbish blow a foot high
around my factory, um, isn't that an environmental problem?
Um, by law, it's not supposed to leave their property.
Um, they will send the guy, if I ring the council
to say there's rubbish built up on my property,
the council will ring them.
They will send a guy over
and clean my front yard with my front car parks.
Doesn't that mean there's a problem?
Stop skirting the problem
and then come out and let's fix it.
Um, it, it's just become, uh, a hazard
to us and a problem to us.
I dunno what my staff are breathing in.
Um, and to the cost involved in trying
to monitor it ourselves is prohibitive.
It's, it's thousands
and thousands of dollars a month that we would all,
we would have to fork out.
And all the council says is, uh, well, you guys have
to prove that there's something wrong.
We've got video evidence,
but they won't engage with us and help us.
Um, we're all rate payers.
They're supposed to represent everyone,
not just the businesses they feel they require.
Um, there's not much else I can say.
It's, it's demoralizing, um, in business, that's for sure.
Um, yeah, uh, sorry about that.
Is there any, um, any questions you, uh,
you guys might have or anything like that?
You, you are obviously in contact with Sharon Shaw
Previously in my neighbor. Yep.
Yep. Yeah. And so are there other groups
or other businesses in the area that you know,
that are doing the same thing?
Um, I know the people down the road have problems.
They've been involved in it as well.
Um, off and on with the meetings with, uh, the mp.
Um, but our two businesses are probably the two main ones
are directly, um, mainly affected by it
with the way the wind comes,
with the way it comes off the pile.
Um, if that pile in winter is wet, like,
I mean they don't need the mist.
Cannon just blows, um, fine mist into my factory
and that fine mist is full of dust.
Um, they need a water sprinkler system to, to kill it down,
um, to kill the whole pile.
Alright. And just one, was it a consented
wa was it a consenting process about setting up
the business or there wasn't?
No, no, we, we've never been contacted.
Um, I don't know them. I have no, uh, will against 'em.
It's a business. We're all trying to make money.
Um, but we were never consulted.
We didn't know even that this was going in
until there was a pile building up there.
Alright, thanks. Uh,
Thank you. Um,
yeah,
and thank you for bringing this, just bringing this
to our attention and for putting in the
photo into your submission.
Um, it's helpful for me. I just have a few questions.
You might not know the answers,
but, um, do you know, is this company like
contracted to the Auckland Council?
Um, when we've dealt with the council, they have,
they have kind of, uh, they have implied that it's, um,
it's a cheaper option than the
current people that are out there. Um,
So it is contracted to Auckland Council.
I dunno if it's contracted to,
Okay. I just wonder because
um, if it is contracted to council,
then there's a tender process that's sort of,
I'm pretty sure it comes around every three years.
Yeah. Um, and it would be interesting to know where
that came on the te where it was actually,
if it is contracted to where that tender is
because, um, that is also an opportunity to, um,
to strengthen those, um, those issues that you're having
and actually strengthen the tender process. Um,
We've got kiwi, we've got kiwi waste on coming out. Yeah.
Okay. Okay, cool. Thanks. I could ask them. Thank you.
Yes, I, i I, I dunno how it's all worked.
Um, like I said, I've got no, no problems
with the company themselves.
Um, but it just should not have to affect all
of our business, like my business.
Um, it's just not, uh, it's just one of those things
that has to be sorted out that the council has just skirted.
Keep skirting it.
Alright, well look, thanks very much Corey.
Um, and we are hearing from Kiwi waste now, so.
Yep, not a problem. Thank you
very much. Thanks for listening to us.
You've given us some good questions. Thanks very much.
Bye. Alright.
Kiwi waste there.
You need to ask them to turn me, um, microphone.
Okay. If we've got, uh, if we've got you there, Mr.
Godard, um, can you turn your camera on or your microphone?
We can't hear either or see either.
Looks like, so they are there.
He needs to promote himself as a panelist.
You may need to promote yourself
as a panelist if you can hear me.
Oh, here we go. Got you. Hello. Oh, thanks. Uh, thanks Matt.
Alright, cheers.
So you have you heard the previous submitters?
Oh, a hundred percent, yes.
I've been on since the started.
Alright, so we've just had, um, Sharon Shaw
and a IL, um, talking.
So now, um, thank you for, uh, your, um, reply
and we are looking forward to hearing from you with
for the next 10 minutes and
hopefully leave time for questions.
No problem. Uh, I'm, I'm Matt.
Um, so director Kiwi Waste, we've been going five years, um,
at this site here in only Hung on maybe three, three
and a half years since, um, August, 2021, I believe.
Um, I, I would agree with Sharon
that this is probably not the best place to, um, here this,
but um, I guess the reason why council's no help
to anyone is they've found there's no issue here.
Um, it's actually quite a robust process to get, uh,
consent for something like this.
We've, um, all sorts of reports
and resource consent consultants
and all sorts of stuff, uh, a hundred page documents
and a whole lot of money to, um, get the consent,
um, very robust.
And, um, consent was granted
and we we're not perfect,
but we like to think we do our best to abide by the consent.
We certainly, um, try very hard.
And, um, I guess my first comment is
we do not have any contracts with Auckland Council.
Thank you. Uh, we, um, we work
as a receiving as in a transfer station.
So, um, people bring their rubbish to us.
Fin companies do earthworks demo companies public,
they bring their rubbish here, we consolidate it,
break it down, pull out the steel, load it on trucks,
take it down to Hampton Downs land, uh, landfill.
So that, that's our operation.
Um, no contracts with the council, we don't have trucks.
We, um, we receive it
and then we transport it in the trucks
that we do have to landfill.
So the term, what the term of our transfer station
or our operation is, um, post collection.
So we do no, um, no rubbish collections.
It all comes to here. Uh, I
don't have too much to, um, add to the statement.
Um, apart from repeating myself that I think, um,
Auckland Council is the best place to, um,
hear these concerns.
Um, I find it a little frustrating to go through all this
because, um, it's, it's a difficult economy.
Um, puns are down.
Um, I wanna be working hard to keep the guys employed, to
keep the tonnage coming through the gate to try
and be profitable to, and,
and it's um, it's not that easy to try
and do this as well as trying, um, to do all that stuff.
Um, as well,
the council has been here, um, many times.
Every time they get um,
they get the phone call, they have to come out.
Um, the word I get, um, used
by them off the record is serial complainant.
I've had them in here waiting 10 minutes,
so it looks like they've actually investigated, um,
because there is no issue and then they leave.
Um, Auckland Council is, I think they're quite tough.
They're quite thorough and they're um, they're quite fair.
And if they, um, if they give us a green light, then
who are we to, um, argue with that?
Um, I guess I'd say
we have neighbors on three sides that when there are issues,
they'll ring me and we'll, we'll sort it out.
Um, the neighbor on immediately behind us,
he is closer in lineal meters in the businesses over the
road who you heard from
and he's given us a letter of support.
Um, businesses over the back, we have issues both ways.
Sometimes they calls us, US issues, sometimes vice versa.
We ring each other, we sort it out, we work through it.
Um, uh, I guess in some ways I can
understand the concerns If you've been here sort of,
you know, 40 years and you're a small business
and then this operation turns up,
but, um, there's only
so much heavy industrial zoning we've gotta go somewhere.
Um, we're a critical part of the local economy.
We have 160 trucks a day.
Um, it's just one of those ugly functions that,
uh, a, a functioning economy must, must have to have.
Um, and yeah, I've got, all I can add to that is, is, um,
no prosecutions, no issues.
Um, counsel is
honest hard if we're doing stuff wrong
and we weren't perfect at the start,
but in the last six to nine months we've had, um, no issues.
Um, the council have sort of said that
that much in their, in their statement.
So there's not much I can add really apart from, um,
supporting their statement and, um, just try
and emphasize that we, um, continue working hard
because it's, um, it's,
it's not easy running a business in this environment
and it's, um, it's not easy trying to control the dust
and everything else, but we certainly give it our best
effort 'cause we wanna be, um, you know, good neighbors, um,
and we respect the neighbors
and, um, you know, it's,
there's not any more industrial lands so we um,
we have to be somewhere.
Um, that is,
without repeating my statement, um,
that really all is what I've got to say.
Um, hopefully there's time for any questions if, if needed.
Alright, uh, thanks Matt. Um,
Kata. Thank you. Um,
so, um, this is, uh, issue close
to my heart is the zero waste, um, rep for,
for the Greens.
And I I heard you say, you know,
you wanna be a good neighbor, which is wonderful
and you've obviously got a good relationship with some
of your neighbors, so that's really great to hear.
So you mentioned that there, um, sometimes is dust
or sometimes um, vice versa and,
and you just sort that out together.
So, um, you've talked about the Auckland Council finding
no, um, no issues, um,
and going through a process there.
So how,
because it, it sounds, sounded like
that you are saying there isn't any issue with the neighbors
that, um, have brought this petition all the way
here into Parliament.
So what would you like see as the best resolution?
Like, because I don't think they're going
to stop talking about this
'cause they clearly think that, uh, being affected
or have said that they're being affected.
So what do you see as the best way forward
as good neighbors?
Well, what, what I find with the,
the other neighbors is when, when there's an issue, they,
they'll either knock on the door or they'll ring my phone
and we'll talk about it and we'll, we'll, we'll sort it out.
Um, because like I said, we're not perfect
and over the back, they're not perfect either.
They have, you know, dust and debris coming our way
and we sort it out like grownups.
Um, we are legal, we're here to stay.
Um, I do think we're perhaps handling it a whole lot better
now than we were at the beginning.
Um, and I think we,
I don't have, I don't, I don't wanna speak on their behalf,
but I, I just have to commit to giving our best efforts
and put our trust in the council that, um,
they're the regulatory authority.
Um, if you can't rely on them to do it,
then what else can we do?
If, if, if they say we're doing okay, then um,
I guess we have to take their word for it.
Um, who, who would, who would doubt the council?
I just say, um, couple submitters talked about the, the
size of the pile has reduced,
it's half the size it used to be.
Was that as a result of council intervention or
That that was a result of extreme rubbish
after Covid as the economy took off again?
So we, we, we had had a lot on site.
Now we're back to normal levels.
Um, it's not in anyone's interest to have
that much rubbish on site.
Um, now we have, uh, a pile that sort of stays the same
as our incoming and outgoing volumes are the same.
And I don't think the sides
of the pile would influence the dust.
It's, um, I think the neighbors would agree with that.
Um, the pile, as you move on with the machinery, it,
it gives off dust, gives off dust
and that's why we have the fog cannons, et cetera,
around the boundary to capture that dust.
And it's difficult to put that into words,
but as I look at the window here, I
see the fog cannon running and I would imagine,
or I could assume a hundred percent that there'd be no dust
exiting the boundary.
Have you met with the neighbors
or would you be prepared, like if the local MP organized a
meeting, would you be happy to meet with them, discuss this?
I'll, I'll meet with anyone. Um, we're, we are here, um,
I, they have had a reluctance to talk to me.
They'd rather go through
all the regularly regulatory
authorities apart from coming to me.
They've had WorkSafe here, they've had trans power here.
I've had Damian Fleming up here in the office.
Um, anyone they can complain to gets the complaint
and in the end there's nobody left apart from the
parliamentary whatever you guys are parliamentary petition.
Um, because no one else has, um, given them any traction.
Um, so that should tell the story.
Alright, any members? Any other questions? Alright.
Okay, well thank you. Um, we'll, uh, we'll endeavor
to engage with council, um, as a committee, um, from here on
and that is what, we'll, we'll work out where to from here.
So thank you for, uh, for your time.
Thank you.